new blog post: Custom K8s Scheduler for Highly Available Apps (#24136)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2020-09-25-custom-k/2020-09-25-custom-k8s-scheduler-for-HA-apps.md

![3-node, multi-zone cockroachdb cluster](image01.png)

When adding additional resources to the cluster we also distribute them across zones. For the speediest user experience, we add all Kubernetes nodes at the same time and then scale up the StatefulSet.

![illustration of phases: adding Kubernetes nodes to the multi-zone cockroachdb cluster](image02.png)

Note that anti-affinites are satisfied no matter the order in which pods are assigned to Kubernetes nodes. In the example, pods 0, 1 and 2 were assigned to zones A, B, and C respectively, but pods 3 and 4 were assigned in a different order, to zones B and A respectively. The anti-affinity is still satisfied because the pods are still placed in different zones.

To remove resources from a cluster, we perform these operations in reverse order.

We first scale down the StatefulSet and then remove from the cluster any nodes lacking a CockroachDB pod.

![illustration of phases: scaling down pods in a multi-zone cockroachdb cluster in Kubernetes](image03.png)

> Now, remember that pods in a StatefulSet of size N must have ids in the range [0,N). When scaling down a StatefulSet by M, Kubernetes removes the M pods with the M highest with ordinals from highest to lowest, [the reverse in which they were added](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/#deployment-and-scaling-guarantees). Consider the cluster topology below:

Reviewer: I'd write:
```suggestion
Now, remember that pods in a StatefulSet of size _n_ must have ids in the range `[0,n]`. When scaling down a StatefulSet by _m_, Kubernetes removes _m_ pods, starting from the highest ordinals and moving towards the lowest, [the reverse in which they were added](/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/#deployment-and-scaling-guarantees).  
Consider the cluster topology below:
```

![illustration: cockroachdb cluster: 6 nodes distributed across 3 availability zones](image04.png)

As ordinals 5 through 3 are removed from this cluster, the statefulset continues to have a presence across all 3 availability zones.

![illustration: removing 3 nodes from a 6-node, 3-zone cockroachdb cluster](image05.png)

However, Kubernetes' scheduler doesn't guarantee the placement above as we expected at first.

> > Pods in a replication controller or service are automatically spread across zones. [docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/best-practices/multiple-zones/#pods-are-spread-across-zones)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes can [automatically spread Pods across zone](/docs/setup/best-practices/multiple-zones/#pods-are-spread-across-zones).
```
(I wouldn't mention ReplicationController; it's deprecated - I also have an [open PR](https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/23498) to drop mentioning it in the multiple zones page).

> > For a StatefulSet with N replicas, when Pods are being deployed, they are created sequentially, in order from {0..N-1}. [docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/#deployment-and-scaling-guarantees)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a StatefulSet with _n_ replicas, when Pods are being deployed, they are created sequentially, in order from `{0..n-1}`. See [StatefulSet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/#deployment-and-scaling-guarantees) for more details.
```

Consider the following topology:

![illustration: 6-node cockroachdb cluster distributed across 3 availability zones](image06.png)

These pods were created in order and they are spread across all availability zones in the cluster. When ordinals 5 through 3 are terminated, this cluster will lose its presence in zone C!

![illustration: terminating 3 nodes in 6-node cluster spread across 3 availability zones, where 2/2 nodes in the same availability zone are terminated, knocking out that AZ](image07.png)

Worse yet, our automation, at the time, would remove Nodes A-2, B-2, and C-2. Leaving CRDB-1 in an unscheduled state as persistent volumes are only available in the zone they are initially created in.

> To correct the latter issue, we now employ a "hunt and peck" approach to removing machines from a cluster. Rather than blindly removing kubernetes nodes from the cluster, only nodes without a CockroachDB pod would be removed. The much more daunting task was to wrangle the kubernetes scheduler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To correct the latter issue, we now employ a "hunt and peck" approach to removing machines from a cluster. Rather than blindly removing Kubernetes nodes from the cluster, only nodes without a CockroachDB pod would be removed. The much more daunting task was to wrangle the Kubernetes scheduler.
```
